you want conversations between people
who don't hold the same Viewpoint if
they're reliable people because that's
where the real thinking takes
place and so for me what you just
described was the defining feature of
Western Civilization I came from I was
born in Somalia and I lived in Saudi
Arabia and I lived in Kenya and I lived
in Ethiopia and then I landed in the
Netherlands in
1992 and there was so many differences
between the world uh the non-western
world I grew up in and the Western world
that I came
to but the one thing that I would say
was really different and was this that
you can't really have
these radically different views you can
be religious you can be atheist you can
be pro market you can be anti Market you
can in fact in the streets of America
shout the most anti-American things even
burn the American flag and that that is
protected that for me was
wow and when I say let's talk about
restoration I'm now seeing a breakdown
of that a near collapse of that on the
political level on the academic level on
the Civic level on the journalism level
we are breaking up into tribes like the
world where I came from where you have
not the pursuit of the truth but
ownership of the truth My Truth Versus
your truth and that kind of nonsense is
now a serious serious Dee rooted problem
in the west and that I think is an
outcome of subversion well okay so so
let's let's take that apart further so
you talk about a uh relapse into a kind
of tribalism of idea ownership so
there's a disintegration of something
that was unified into a more pluralistic
tribal landscape okay so that's one of
the things let's Identify some of the
other characteristics of the collapse so
we could talk about purposeful and
accidental subversion so let's start
with the marxists with regard to
purposeful subversion okay so KL
Marx split the world into oppressor and
oppressed in an envious
manner presuming that all the moral
virtue was with the oppressed and all
the evil was with the oppressor and that
that all could be understood from within
the framework of Economics so the
primary axis of Oppression and oppressed
for Marx was the economic axis and he
presumed that the reason that that
inequality between oppressor and
oppressed exist was because of the
structure of capitalism at least that's
what he claimed now whether or not he
believed that is a whole different issue
okay so now I want to take that in two
directions I want to point to how that's
metastasized into what I think is less
than ideally conceptualized as cultural
Marxism and I want to also discuss its
precursors its archetypal precursors
okay so what seems to me to happened and
I want your thoughts on this is that
Marx established the framework for an
elaborated victim victimizer
narrative but he basically stuck to the
economic realm when he made that case
now as the revolution unfolded what we
found out was that the subversion of the
capitalist order in favor of the
oppressed only produced the univers
ization of poverty and produce no viable
redistribution of equity or income and
so by the 1970s the hollow oness of the
economic approach to the victim
victimizer had been demonstrated so
thoroughly that even idiot marxists in
France were forced to accept it and so
you know the proof is compelling when a
French intellectual is forced to swallow
it and so then what happened as far as I
could tell is the postmodernists who
were all Marxist at their core decided
that there was no utility in beating the
economic inequality drum anymore but
that they could fragment the victim
victimizer narrative into a metastasis
and say well the basic idea that it was
a power Dynamic that ruled everything
was correct
but we underestimated the seriousness of
the power dynamic because it shows up
in the relationship between men and
women and it shows up in the patriarchal
structure of the family and it shows up
in the dynamic of sex and then the
dynamic of gender and race and ethnicity
so all of a sudden you have victim
between countries sure sure between
races between tribes you can understand
the postmodern claim was you could
was that even though they purported
to dispense with the idea of a
superordinate meta narrative they
smuggled in the power narrative as the
fundamental
exploratory concept and then
metastasized it to account for to
explain the relations between human
beings regardless of how they categorize
themselves so that every group
categorization became a locust of power
and
exploitation right and so now we have a
metastic Marxism okay so that's bringing
it forward now I want to bring it
backward and you tell me what you think
about this because I think Marxism
itself is a variant of something more
deeper much deeper
so there's a there's a Marxist like
spirit that inverts the French
Revolution soon after it occurs and so
and that was well before Marx and and I
I've been thinking more archetypally
let's say in in relationship to
fundamental stories that Marxism is a
variant Marxism versus capitalism let's
say as a variant of the story of Cain
and
Abel right because Cain and Abel is
really the first victim victimizer
narrative and it basically presents the
human moral
landscape because it's the first story
about human beings in history right
because Adam and Eve were in the Garden
of Eden let's say Cain and Abel are the
first two human beings that are born in
the world of history and they develop
modes of being that are antithetical to
one another with Cain being the
oppressed angry bitter malevolent
murderous and then genocidal
victim and Abel being the
successful right the successful
individual who strives forward aims up
and makes the proper sacrifices now
that's presented in the biblical Corpus
as the fundamental spiritual Division
and
Cain's failure to make the proper
offering and then his Rebellion against
God like there's a luciferian touch to
that and it's definitely something that
attracted Marx because Marx was
a admirer of meph
of girth is mephistophiles and
mephistophiles was the variant of the
usurping spirit whose motivation was
nothing but destruction you know you
talked about the attack on all the
levels of subsidiary Society
simultaneously right I mean the marxists
definitely planned that we can't have
marriage because men and women are in a
power battle we can't have families
because the family is a patriarchal
oppressive institution we can't have
communities because all power should be
deeded to the state seeded to the state
Etc but it seems to me
that all of that has that roots in that
fundamental antagonism that's laid out
initially in the story of Cain and Abel
and what we are seeing is we're seeing
variance of that story play out and also
at an accelerated rate because of the
rate of technological change so well so
I've been thinking about those things a
lot that's what I've been lecturing
about on this last tour and in part
that's what my new book is about so I'm
curious about your reaction first of all
to the idea of a metastasizing
Marxism and then to the idea that
Marxism itself is a variant of a it's a
retelling of a more fundamental
story um so fascinating and I'm glad
you're doing this okay so my two
reactions then or just as I was
listening to you
um one um thing that has occurred to me
is marks and his work and his
legacy and what we've done with it so um
you know this history better than I do
but the reaction he was hoping for he
had created a new new religion
Marxism it failed
because in instead of people sticking
his followers his own disciples
sticking with his revolutionary
goals what sprung
up is the reformists basically what I'm
getting at I'm schooled in political
science you're psychologist but it was
you know the left and the right the left
divided up into these two branches and
one branch is fully Marxist and
revolutionary and committed to the
Revolution and the other one because
becomes reformist and I think that is
the first defeat of the Marxist idea
that instead of overing the capitalist
system you work within the capitalist
system and through incremental means
everybody's life gets better so that was
the first defeat up until
1989 the that whole economic argument of
take from the rich give to the
poor uh falls apart when it becomes I
think
obvious if you if you stick with the
material economic uh the economic top
topic that the Soviet Union collapses
and not only is that does the Soviet
Union all have satellites everywhere
that these fiveyear plans touch you have
Devastation you have masses of deaths
you have uh concentration comps you have
starvation um
and then you look at the west and
there's growth and and so on so in 1989
I think there is this
sense the winners the Victoria those who
are victorious maybe you want to say you
were comparing Kan and abble you can
say those who are
victorious make one big mistake in my
view after
1989 which is they forget about it they
think we've won this right history is
over history is over let's move
on the loser for the loser history is
never over for the loser history begins
when he loses he has to shake off all of
this and come up and come back and they
come back now with this idea of identity
groups of culture the person who can
tell this way better than I can is James
Lindsay who has been through all of
their Creeds and Creeds and is really
eloquent in the way he tells this right
right but they divert towards the
culture thing but my takeaway as as a
relatively new Westerner is I come into
this world of ideas good ideas bad ideas
I'm 22 years old I'm trying to find an
explanation for why are these rich
countries rich and Powerful why are poor
countries poor uh I was a Muslim so it's
like if we have the as a Muslim if I
have God's last prophet God's last book
God is on my side then why we and
miserable and and so on and so in that
world of ideas um in the 1990s when I'm
going to University I'm acquainted with
the idea of national socialism that
nearly destroyed European society and
Western society and what follows after
the defeat listen to this Jordan after
the defeat of national socialism what
happens is a an intense process of
denazification in fact using some of the
tools of subversion that bov speaks
about and after the process of
deification what follows is another
Reckoning of what was national socialism
and why would a society as advanced as
Germany fall victim to ideas that later
on we all understood to be so
destructive this is in in my classrooms
okay this is what's happening I I I come
into the West just as it's going through
that Reckoning of the idea
and the idea is um forensically
scrutinized
and it it becomes after we fully
understand what Hitler's uh ideas were
that this is something that would never
and should never happen again now this
is something we did not do to Communism
right right right definitely not yeah
after the fall of the Soviet Union there
was no campaign of decommunization or
Demar
ification of of everything and anything
there was no Reckoning so up until I
think
2002 2003 we were still finding
individuals who had been found to be
active or sympathizers with Hitler we
were trying them still we were still
trying to go after them and put them in
jail but we never did anything of the
sort with Marxism so the the first thing
I noticed the big thing is of course
this this terrible idea keeps recurring
and it metastasizes and it manifests
itself in different ways because for the
young Generations it never really has
been here this is what Marxism L to the
the death toll I mean we all have been
schooled in how many people actually
died but more interesting I think more
fascinating is the the nazzi
psyche do you know we we explored it to
the point
that right now there are conversations
we can't have without everyone
referencing Nazism in fact I think one
of the reasons why Europe is completely
paralyzed when it comes to the issue of
immigration is because that there is
this Terror this fear that they might
fall again into that nasty Collective
Madness of putting putting people in
concentration CS we haven't done that to
to uh to Marx we haven't ideas of Marx
in communism and I think it's a bit we
are a bit on the later side but we
should do it
[Music]